So we're now on.
Well, on that point of the scholarly uses of the material, I've always said that collectors are scholars by virtue of what they're doing because they're preserving artifacts from the past.
Some may be more scholarly than others by temperament or by inclination.
Some would even say they're not scholars, but in the way I'm defining scholarly, meaning having a concern with preserving materials from the past to use for investigating the past, they are scholarly.
Now, some really know the material, what they've collected, better than the professional scholars in their field do.
But the same is true of book dealers, too.
Many of them know the field better than the professors do.
Others don't, of course, but then there are many professors that don't know their fields, too.
So it's not a question of whether a person is a professor or a collector, but of the mental outlook and the very fact that somebody is interested in collecting things from the past, I think, shows a scholarly temperament.
And that's anything.
I mean, however trivial you may think matchbooks and various things are, they are all artifacts that tell something about some period of the past.
Some, of course, seem more important than others, but it all depends on what aspect of the past you're trying to investigate.
So I think no matter what one collects, it shows this scholarly attitude.
Just as an example, at Oxford last week, I was with Julian Robertson.
Of course, they're still working on the Opic Collection,
great stories, their children's books, which he said were never collected.
Why is this collection so important to Oxford?
They were never considered worthy by the institution to collect.
And so now you get that collection, and then having this collection inspires others to add to it, and they were just announcing Friday the addition of another private collection, and picking up on what you said,
Now, here's Oxford, which has been around as a library for hundreds of years.
They had these two little, not more than two, they had about half a dozen, Charles and Mary Lamb, tales of Shakespeare, Shakespeare tales, individual tales of little paperback pamphlets that were contemporary to the writer.
They didn't even know they existed, with wonderful PowerPoints.
You see, we didn't know these existed until the collector gave them to us.
No library can collect everything.
They always have to make decisions about what they're going to collect.
So that's inevitable, that that's going to happen, that later on people will decide something should be collected, and then it has to be done, and the libraries happen.
I mean, then it can be presented to libraries.
That is one of the things that private collectors contribute, is that they can
they often focus on something to collect that the institutions haven't.
So then they can be preserving it at a time when the institutions wouldn't want to be bothered with it, and then later that collection can go to an institution.
Sometimes the reason the institution can't be bothered is not so much that they don't understand the importance of that material as that the material isn't yet
valuable enough on the market to cause dealers to catalog it and to make it easy for, relatively easy for librarians to find, because if one is trying to assemble something that isn't generally sought after, then you have to just spend time going through junky bookstores, locating these things.
Well, no librarian
can spend the time to do that.
The money and time involved just couldn't be justified.
So the private collector has to do this and then present it or sell it to a librarian.
When we talked for the first time on a phone, and it was just about the time that the ornithological books on the Martin Collection were being sold, and I remember you were pretty upset
that this had not been kept together as a collection.
And you had mentioned that, apparently, in his will, he did leave the estate, the executor, some leeway, some discretion on how, if they stopped, they could keep him as a collection.
Well, that's my understanding, yes.
I don't really know anything about it.
I haven't seen the will, but it was... I mean, is this something I do think I should pursue and try and write about?
well because there is a lot of the general that that general issue yes i mean and you could use the martin as one example uh and mention other examples as well but i think the general point of the the material that accomplishes more by being together than it could if it were dispersed then shouldn't be dispersed now that isn't always true i mean there there have been some collections that are so miscellaneous or
just high spots, and they're great items in themselves, but it's not a collection of depth in any author that would be the basis for a scholar to work on it.
But the only reason for keeping that kind of collection together is that that particular collector brought it together, if there's a great deal of interest in that person for some reason.
I mean, maybe that collector was a famous political figure,
If there's enough interest in the person, then it's of interest to keep the collection together because it was that person's collection.
But otherwise, there isn't any reason to keep that kind of collection together because it doesn't have any greater significance together than it would separated.
Whereas when you have a collection in depth of one author or of one movement or...
or an archive, as this was, this Martin Selby archive, was the author's archive, all the materials relating to the book.
And better than anything that's held by any institution, too.
Well, apparently it couldn't have been held anywhere else, because it was unique.
I mean, the books, the printed books, too, I think, were as good as it is.
Yeah.
And whenever that exists, then,
It's always better for scholarship if these materials that were originally together, they were the author's working papers, if they remain together, because every item takes on meaning in the context.
And while it's not impossible for a scholar to reconstruct those connections by going around to different places and looking at all of them, it's harder to, and not simply because of the travel involved, but that just
You might not think to connect certain things unless you have them there side by side.
So I think, in general, that kind of thing shouldn't be separated, and there are some kinds of collections that can be.
It's an important point, and I think that you're in a... I hesitate to hear the word you need, but you're a scholar, and you certainly appreciate the value of archives and institutions.
and that you're a collector, and as you get to the Crozier Club, and so you understand what the private collecting is about.
Does this pose any kind of intellectual problem for you in balancing or two, whether or not deciding which materials should go back out into the private market, which ones should be resorted?
No, I don't have any problem with that.
at all about that, and I think I already suggested how I would define the difference between a collection that can be broken up without any loss to scholarship and the kind that can't.
I think another interesting example of that is that the Mulholland Magic Collection, which is at the Players Club, the private benefactor who came forward, and at the last, as I understand the story,
about the 11th hour, came in and bought the thing from the Clarence Club.
Ricky Jay and his cousin.
I've interviewed Ricky.
I've interviewed Dick Manny.
He's talking to me for the first time when I was a book collector, so that would make it interesting.
He's kind of a high spot collector, but he certainly has some very good things.
He has some wonderful things.
Melville letter.
I'll be seeing him again next week at the sale.
Yeah, I think the rest of the Martins collection, as wonderful material as it is, you know, there really isn't anything there to speak of.
It's not as important, you know, to keep that collection as a whole together.
There were some other parts of it, like the Melville letters.
It would be nice to see them
kept together because he had 24 of them and no one, there's no other person ever had that many.
But it's not, I mean, that in itself doesn't constitute an archive of that author.
So it is true that it's not as great a loss to disperse that kind of collection.
You were asking whether I saw anything.
had any difficulty or thought of any conflict, and I don't, because I see all parts of the book world as working together.
And I see no reason that there shouldn't be cooperation among all.
I don't see that there's a problem.
I mean, naturally, there's competition between one collector and another, but I don't think that's a
damaging thing anyway, but I mean, I don't see any real, I don't think people should think in terms of that these are different camps or different interests.
I think it all, I think everybody involved in the world of books is ultimately doing the same thing, which is preserving historical evidence.
I think that you find some of your very best dealers, for instance, though they don't collect themselves, are instrumental certainly in perceiving
Well, and they're often very concerned about where they sell something.
They'd rather sell it to one person than another, even though they're going to get the same amount of money, but they... Maybe even less sometimes.
Yeah, that's right.
They do sometimes take a sacrifice in order to see that it's where they think it ought to be.
I think about the Three Minute Quaritch just a couple days ago, and he showed me around, and they bought Kenneth Clark's library.
They have it, and he said, one of the good things about being Quaritch is that we're trying to walk people
Number one, we can afford something like this, but number two, there isn't any sense of urgency that we have to sell it and that we have to sell it to the highest price.
We'd really like to find some place to put it as a collection.
And this idea that something should go where it really belongs springs from the idea that
one, even though one legally owns these things, they really are cultural artifacts that you're just the caretaker for, that you can only own it for a certain period of time, and then it will pass into other hands, and so that you're just a temporary owner, really.
Custodially.
That's right.
So I think that, I think it really springs from that basic idea that one would then think, well, it does matter where I let this material go.
It's much better if it goes one place than another.
One other point that I want to mention before I forget, which I discussed in an article a long time ago, and I may have even said it to you on the phone in the past, and it relates to something you were talking about earlier, that all books and manuscripts ought to be treated as if they were
I mean, this idea of rare bookings is artificial, because I think that that is a concise way of summing up what this whole point of view means, I think, that since people who are interested in preserving historical evidence are preserving physical artifacts, and how some are more
Some people are more interested in one kind of artifact at one time, and then, as we were saying earlier, others that were neglected become popular as collector's items.
Well, what this should mean, if you take the overview, is that everything is of interest to somebody at some time, so you can't really make any distinction between them.
Rare book rooms, and of course, increasingly, they're called special collections, which at least is a good sign that it shows that there's
lot of the stuff in rare book rooms is not rare it's there because essentially for the wrong reason it's there because it has a high market value often the definition of that material is put in terms of that it's fragile or that its physical uh state needs to be preserved well that's not i mean of course it does but so does the physical state of every other book that exists need to be preserved
I mean, a tenth printing of some novel that's in the general stacks rather than in the rare book room is just as much a book artifact.
It's just as important because it represents what that publisher was doing at that time.
It shows that that book was popular enough to go into a tenth printing.
It can be used for, I mean, it is just as significant an artifact for history as the first editions.
or the first printing, it's natural, it's understandable that people traditionally have had more interest in firsts, but I'm glad to say there's increasing interest among collectors of authors of collecting every printing, because that does show, then, the impact that authors had.
I mean, you don't have the full story of that author's publications until you have all of those,
And you can learn a lot about publishing practices, too, by seeing the changes as these later printings are.
Well, later printings are often scarcer now than firsts.
Didn't Charles Lamb say 11th printings?
He couldn't understand why people don't collect 11th printings, because they'd be much harder to get.
That's true.
They are because of the tradition of collecting firsts and anything
Sometimes something is in demand, that pushes prices up, and if you pay more money, it means you'll save it.
So there's been all this pressure to preserve first printings, and there hasn't.
People throw these others away, and as a result, when we started the Melville Project in 1605, it was several years before we found a copy of the 1871 printing of Moby Dick.
That was the last printing
from the original plates in this country, the American Harper plates.
And, of course, we needed to have multiple copies of every printing for collation so that we could see whether there were any textual differences, and eventually I'll be using all of that for our bibliography, too.
But we needed to have all that.
The Newberry was cooperating and trying to build up a collection of all these things.
And we wondered if we were ever going to find a copy of that.
We did locate one in the New York State Library in Albany.
There's no particular reason they should have it.
Probably they either decided they wanted Moby Dick until 1871 and just bought the latest printing, or else what's probably more likely is that just someone gave them a collection of
their own library, and that was in it.
They were able to acquire that copy?
No, we didn't.
But that one, at least, we knew of one copy in existence.
And then we alerted book dealers.
So they were really looking for it.
It was a big help to have that whole network of people looking.
And we ended up with one or two.
I don't remember now.
I think there are two there now at the Newberry Library.
But, anyway, that's an example of the fact that that is a much rarer book than the first.
It still... And you maintain as significant, textually significant.
Well, it's... It's hard to say it's as significant textually.
I think the way you'd have to put it is that
that everything is significant for establishing the history of something.
And you don't know whether you have the whole story until you have all these items.
So you can't complete a historical study of the text until you've seen that.
So in that way, I mean, that's an example of what I mean by saying that everything that's in the general stacks of a library really ought to be
taken care of in the same way that the so-called rare book collections are, because they're equally, they are artifacts just as much as the others, and the fact that they are not taken care of as much means not only is that 1871 scarce, but when you do find one, it's likely, or when you do find later printings, they're likely to be rebound, because the
books that are in the general stacks of libraries, they often rebind them when they get in bad condition.
So then you've lost that evidence, too.
I mean, you've not only lost the evidence of what the binding was like, so if you're studying the publisher and publishing practices at the time, you also can't trust the contents because you can certainly tell if any numbered page is missing,
but you don't know whether there were other leaves at the beginning and end.
I mean, there could be an introduction that wasn't on numbered pages, and you wouldn't know it if it was missing.
Once something is rebound, you never know what's happened in the process of rebinding, and it's quite common for things to get left out.
Particularly in libraries.
And sometimes intentionally, because in the 19th century practice of advertising in the back of the book, well, when a library rebinds, sometimes,
the binder just throws the ads away, thinking that's not a part of the book.
And yet, of course, sometimes it's actually part of the last gathering.
So it was on the press with the text, not just a publisher's catalog insertion, which it also sometimes was, but sometimes it's integral with the last few leaves of the text.
So, I mean, I know that this point of view is unrealistic.
I mean, if you say this,
you say that a library ought to look after everything in the same way they do things in the rare book collection, and they'll say, well, how is this workable?
How could we possibly do that?
I mean, I recognize that that poses a problem from a practical point of view, but nevertheless, I don't see how it can be denied as a theoretical or conceptual matter that these are artifacts of historical interest, and
And the real reason some of them get moved to the Special Collections Department is not that their physical form needs to be preserved, because that would apply to everything, but because some of them become valuable from a monetary point of view, and they get moved for that reason.
Do you think it is monetary value, particularly in universities and institutions, that they are designated rare, and they
Well, I think that's a big part of it.
Ideally, it's there to stimulate research.
Yeah, but then, as I say, that applies to everything in the whole library.
And gradually, first it was books, 15th century books.
Anything up to 1640 got put in rare book rooms because there was the STC, which ended at 1640, and that gives you a... I mean, reference books so often have an important impact on what is collected or saved or paid attention to.
And then there was the Wing bibliography, which went up through 1700.
Now, in some libraries, everything in the 18th century is getting moved out of the stack.
That can't happen in the biggest libraries because the stacks have so many 18th century books.
But that is happening some places.
And a lot of those books are not of great value from the monetary point of view, but they all are getting more so because there's now the 18th century short title catalog, which has given an impetus of increased attention to 18th century books.
And there will be a time when every book before 1800 has a certain value simply because of its age and no other reason, and that it provides additional reason in libraries for moving these into a protected area.
I do think that that underlies it.
Can we talk a little bit about your own collecting?
Sure.
Well, one part of... Do you still get a special... Do you find something?
Well, of course.
I think anybody... I don't think people lose that.
And that's why when one develops one particular area so much that you rarely find anything to add to the collection, you then...
move into some other area.
I think every collector does that.
You start out thinking you're going to collect one or two things, and you end up collecting quite a few things because if those thrills don't come often enough, and that often happens once you get a really good collection, while then when you find an item that belongs, it is a great thrill because you already have so much, but naturally that isn't going to happen very often.
So for that reason, you have to move into something else where you will get this excitement
Do you find the greatest excitement is the acquisition?
Or is it the actual possession?
Does that continue the excitement for you?
Well, I think the possession is only a part of this chain we were talking about, where that if you really respect the item as historical evidence, you can't think of it as something that you will always possess, because you won't always be around, and yet you want it to be
protected later, even if it's something, I mean, maybe even especially if it's something that's not generally recognized as being important by other people, you want to make sure that it's going to be protected.
So I don't know that I could rank the kinds of excitement.
Naturally, it's excitement to find the item in the first place.
sometimes one finds something that fits in exactly, and yet you didn't even know it existed.
It's not something you could have known to look for because you didn't know it existed, and you find it.
And, of course, that's a thrill, and then it's a pleasure to put that on the shelf with related items.
So, of course, there is a pride of possession, the fact that you've got
these things lined up there that may form a better collection in that restricted area than anyone else has.
But I don't think of the possession as being the only thing.
It's just part of this sequence because the use made of it, too.
I mean, I've used some of the things I have for articles.
Other people have used some of them.
And then I hope in the future other people will.
So the pleasure partly comes from that, too.
I was just on the thought there.
One of my subjects also is Leonard Baskins, the artist, and his wife, who also is a collector.
What impressed me about some of the things that he has and some of the things that he loves most of all are, as you just said, things he found that he never even knew existed in his life, but he recognized immediately, particularly being the artist that he is, and being able to make these lateral
connections, instantly he perceived the value.
And I do not, when I say value, I'm not putting a dollar value on it, but the value of it.
And yet, that's a great fact.
Something you never even knew existed.
And then he demonstrated one book that he found from the 15th to 16th.
It was not a big human.
But it had an illustration in there of the brain, the human brain.
And then he showed me another
a colored plate, which was the exact same illustration.
So somebody must have used, he knew who the artist was, somebody must have used this book to do this, and then he was able to actually make some historic connections and process insights about things that were going on.
And that's exciting when that kind of thing happens.
Sure, the excitement of finding something you didn't know existed is that you really are making it possible for this
to be taken into account in the future in discussions of this subject.
Because if you already, presumably you already know quite a bit about the subject that you're collecting, you've built that up over the years, so then if you come across something you didn't know, it means probably most other people didn't know about it either, because you already are specialized in this field, and it means any bibliographies or reference works that you use hadn't called this to your attention.
But by the fact that you
and put it into your collection, and you list it, and you have your own catalog, maybe eventually some published list will come out.
So in a way, you've given it a place.
It's not lost any longer.
We rescued it.
To go back to your own collecting, would you say you began as a collector to support your own scholarship and research, or did that?
No, I really didn't, though a lot of my collecting now is bibliographical, and so it does relate to what I write, and I do have in my apartment most of the books that I need to consult when I write articles.
So I have built that kind of thing up, but that's not the way I started.
When I was in graduate school, I
I started collecting books published by Mitchell Kennerly and B.W.
Hitch, two American publishers in the early 20th century.
Hitch, as you probably know, that firm became the Viking Press in 1925.
But from 1900 to 1925, it was called B.W.
Hitch, and it was practically a one-man operation.
It got to be fairly large, and he did have a staff, but it was one man in the sense that
He dominated everything.
He chose the books to be published.
He approved the design of the books and the dust jacket, so that the whole thing bore the stamp of his personality.
And Mitchell Kennerly didn't publish as many books.
This is his pre-auction career.
This was before.
was with Anderson Gowdy's that he was primarily a publisher, and he was interested in the way the books looked.
And, of course, Gowdy designed a type for him called Kennerly Type.
And so I was just drawn, as I browsed in the shops, to the way their books looked and the fact that they were publishing authors that we now consider important.
But, of course, these were little publishers at the time.
It made me realize the important role of the smaller publisher, that some of the authors they were publishing couldn't get published by Scribner's and Harper's and Macmillan.
So I started with just those two publishers, but that gradually increased because I saw there was a whole group of publishers that were related in that they were doing the same things and sometimes the same authors even because the
I mean, that sort of confirmed my view that there was a common element if some of the same authors turned up on the lists of these.
So I felt it was a coherent group and that a lot of the books were important in their own right because these authors later became well-known, but of course a lot of the books were of no importance for their content.
Every publisher publishes a certain number of those, but they became part of the total context.
Bonine Lidwright is another firm that I collect, and of course they did publish a lot in the 20s.
But to see, for example, the poetry, I've got them shelved chronologically, but also divided by genre, so fiction is together and poetry is together.
So when you look along the poetry shelf and you come to 1922, well, there's the wasteland.
and then two or three volumes that nobody has heard of now.
Well, that's, I think, is important to have those lined up together.
That shows the publishing context in which the great works emerge.
Well, this is also what these men were thinking in the publishing houses.
So, and another thing that I still, while I was in graduate school, I was interested in some
in publishers that were doing important things, I came across a whole group of Stone and Kimball books in the old Central Bookshop on, wasn't that Wells Street in the Loop, and they had a so-called rare book room on the third floor, and they had just four or five shelves of Stone and Kimball that they wanted to get rid of, and they were priced at a dollar and two dollars, which,
which even then seemed cheap.
And so I bought most of those, and that gave me a start, I mean, a good start on the Stone and Kimball collection.
So that got me started on the 90s as well.
So in this publishing collection, what I have is a group of publishers of the 90s and a group of publishers from the next generation, so that I've covered the period from 1890 to 1930 with a group of
or at least a dozen publishers that I try to do in their entirety, with every later printing of all the books.
And it includes some very small publishers, like Frank Shea's Bookshop, which was on Washington Square in the village in the teens, and they published the Provincetown Plays, so there's early Eugene O'Neill, but he published other little books and pamphlets by
authors that are not maybe really important, but they were important then as a part of the group.
And so I've got quite a few little publishers like that from Greenwich Village, but I also have tried to represent different cities.
I mean, in the early 20th century, really, New York is the
the primary place, but in the 90s, there were interesting publishers trying to reflect or trying to do what we associate with Fantasia in England, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago.
In fact, I think they may have had more interesting publishers doing that than New York did, so I have represented all those
cities.
How do you put boundaries on this, though, on the collection?
Well, you don't, other than to just decide which of these publishers you think are important in this way as being the smaller publishers that were doing things the big ones didn't, and which ones fit together, because naturally, I mean, that is a matter of judgment, and there are always certain borderline publishers that I could say, well, sure, they
could fit if I wanted to go into them, or you could consider them.
I mean, I think the ones I've done are the really core ones in that group, as I've defined the group, but sure, there are others I could add to it.
What kind of generic name do you give this?
Well, I don't have a name for it.
But it does, I mean, it can be described as reflecting
one aspect of publishing history in the period of American publishing history in the period between 1890 and 1930.
Were you able to obtain lists from the various publishers to know it?
None of the publishers are in existence, but the rest of it's an archives.
Well, most of them don't, because publishers' archives haven't survived as much as they should have.
Publishers haven't paid enough
a lot of attention to that.
They should have more of a sense of their own history than they do.
There are a lot of libraries now collecting publishers' archives very assiduously, but an awful lot of archives just got thrown away in the past.
Texas has a memory for this.
So there's the Lillymire and the Lilly Library.
That's my next big swing, by the way, and the Newbury University of Chicago here.
So we went a couple of days out there.
Went to Carr, drive down to Bloomington, and from there was St.
Louis, and spent the day with the Broadston Department.
Very interesting.
And you probably, if you're going from Bloomington to St.
Louis, you probably ought to go by way of Urbana.
I mean, it's right on the way, and the University of Illinois is one of the great libraries.
They don't have a separate building for their
rare book collection, but it has always been an outstanding rare book collection, and as the whole library is, too.
It's, well, there have been times when it was thought of as the next best university library after Harvard, really, and I haven't heard that.
It's always, I mean, I don't think it's there now.
I mean, I don't mean that it's been declining necessarily.
I mean, I think it's still, it's very well run, but
Anyway, it is one of the great libraries.
How did that come to pass?
I mean, they must have had some very generous benefits.
Well, I think they had a series of people interested.
Even before Gordon Ray, he had something to do with it when he was there.
He was there from the end of the Second World War to 1960, and he
He was in the English department and then became the head of the Urbana campus.
And since he was an important collector himself, he was always going through the bookshops in England on annual trips.
And he also bought things for the university, and he sometimes bought whole bookshops.
He would just go in and buy the whole thing, or a whole wall, at least whether it was a bookshop
You can find that out by looking in.
There's some essays of his that Harvard should have.
I'm doing most of my library stuff at Harvard, which is very close for me.
Well, I edited a collection of his essays, which, was it from Worden?
Yeah.
I bought that.
I have that.
Well, in there you'll find
the name of the shop, I think, that he, anyway, that, that, he did do that, so he'd go in to a shop that was interesting and find that there were, there was a whole collection of something that may have filled the whole wall of that shop, and he just bought the whole thing.
He just got there prior to a description, I haven't had a chance to do that.
But even before he was there, there were other people, I know in the English department, there were, there was somebody who built up a great Milton collection there, so it often has depended
I think in any university library, it's dependent on certain faculty members who were very interested in a particular field and pushed the library into acquiring things, and then maybe at their death or retirement, giving their own collection to the library, too.
So it might be worth stopping there, since you'll be going right through there.
I mean, I think the interface
I think the best interstate highway that you could use between the ways would go by Urbana.
And I really want to hit the heartland.
A person, if you wanted to talk to somebody in Urbana, somebody that's probably better to talk to than anyone in the rare book collection, though I don't really know the people in the rare book collection, but someone who's in the library school is Don Crummel.
B.W.
Crummel, K-R-U-M-M-E-L.
K-R-U-M-M-E-L.
And his field is library science and music.
He's written, I mean, music history.
But he's someone who fully understands this integrated view of the book world that I like to take.
I think he does, too.
He understands the relationship of collecting and scholarship and
and the importance of the physical evidence in books and the relation of that to the intellectual content of books.
So I think he'd be a good one to talk to as long as you're in or about him.
I'm going to talk to him every one I can.
My editor at Random House
They're very excited about the book.
Who is your editor?
Becky Salatin is my random host.
I don't know.
And Marty Asher of Vintage.
You know Marty?
Well, I know the name, but I haven't.
But he's the one who wanted the book first.
My agent showed it to Marty.
First person he showed it to.
And he wanted it, but he wanted it for Vintage.
The original was in only one o'clock, and so he worked out this very nice arrangement.
For me, it's my first book.
Just before I left, I was trying to do it, and I said, as much as I like the proposal that I wrote, unless I wrote the proposal, I put my best writing in that proposal.
And so it could actually serve as a series of essays.
I said, it's almost naive.
It's almost naive compared to what I've learned.
But that's the way it usually is with proposals.
Oh, of course it is.
That's a good sign that it shows you're doing the right kind of research for the book, that you're learning things you didn't know to start with.
And things are so much better than I ever expected them to be.
A really fascinating story.
I think there's going to be this University of Texas story, which I spent four days down there.
And that was one reason I really wanted to go to Rona's office.
He was basically the agent in Great Britain for Texas.
as Luke Feldman was.
Did you know Feldman at all, by the way?
No.
I received his catalogs and have a nice run of those catalogs, which are handsome, but I never... I don't think I ever met him.
Interesting.
That was an interesting situation, wasn't it?
And you can talk on the record or off the record for this.
It doesn't matter.
That was a case that has really inspired a lot of why
did Texas really basically just use Felton?
I don't know.
Well, I think I know.
He gave them credit.
They had good terms.
Texas had so much money where they would spend it two, three years in advance.
He would buy things for them.
I guess a number of people knew him.
I, by the way, have not established anything irregular.
And when I went to Texas, I think they were very anxious.
Because they've taken some hits, they've taken some raps.
The BBC did a thing on it a couple years ago and we just saw it.
They had a director down there, Decker Turner, who didn't help at all with some of his statements.
Well, no, he didn't, and I've criticized him in print very severely, too.
Where is that?
In an article called Reproductions and Scholarships.
in studies and bibliography last year.
I may have a Xerox of it.
I don't have any copies of the off-print because I got so few.
I don't have any of that left, but I might have a Xerox copy of it.
That would be great.
I just don't know where I could find it.
Because the subject of that, despite the title, I think maybe that article would be relevant to your thinking about this because it deals in general with the fact that
no reproduction or of any kind, photographic, xerographic, and so on, can be a substitute for the original.
And when you said that Texas has been criticized a lot in the past, well, some of the things they've been criticized for in the past are bad policies.
Well, yes, I mean, in that I agree with.
A lot of the other criticisms I don't, because originally I think what more people have gotten exercised about in Texas is the idea that they seem to be
They had money at least at one time and bought up everything.
You can understand why some people in England didn't like the fact that just because the oil country and all the money there, they were able to pull all these materials that should have stayed in England.
Well, that doesn't bother me or the fact that they...
bought so much that they couldn't get it all cataloged right away.
You always hear people saying, well, they have all this material, but there's no way to get at it.
Even if that were true, I wouldn't see any objection to it, because getting the material is the important thing, and it can be cataloged eventually, but the fact is they handled that very well.
I've worked there, and they have temporary slips so that things are accessible.
When I examined the Melvilles,
Very few of them have been fully catalogued because they've got multiple copies of most of them, Melville titled, and that two people always criticize a library that holds multiple copies of valuable books.
But it's important to have copies side by side for comparison.
They defend that.
Well, I mean, the ultimate example is the Folger Library with 85 copies of the folio.
But it's even more important when books are
expensive books, to have them side by side because it's going to be so rare ever to find copies side by side and you can find out things when you have them there for comparison that you can if they're separated.
So I think that they've always been enlightened in keeping multiple copies and not just regarding them as duplicates.
So I have never criticized them for any of that.
What I do criticize them for is a policy that
at least in part, springs from their feeling of provinciality, of being in a place where people don't come.
And one member of their staff, not Decker and Turner, wrote a letter, and I've seen this.
It wasn't to me, but in fact, I say something about this in that article.
When one person, one scholar, who wanted to do an edition of the letters of some author, and he was
recognized as the person who was doing this, and it would be the addition of the letters, wanted permission to include the ones at Texas.
And he got the reply from the staff member that said, if we let you do that, why would anyone have to come to Texas?
Yes, it was.
And it's incredible that he would put that in writing, that he at least wouldn't try to think of some other reason why they shouldn't do it.
I've got a cute Carlton Lake story that you've done.
And, well, Decker and Turner... Well, I've done a lot of things that I... Well, they should shut that up a little bit.
No, I don't care.
I mean, I don't care about this.
But he... Let me just say, this is something I'm developing in some detail, because you're telling me very interesting things.
So what did you say?
I didn't want to use, so be mindful of that.
That's all right, because I really don't think I'm telling you anything I didn't put in that article.
One of the ways that Eckhart Turner was so inconsistent in what he said, and I think it's just because he didn't think these things through.
It never occurred to him that he was being contradictory or inconsistent, because I've heard him make talks, he made one at the Brilliant Club, in which he
talked about how proud he was of the conservation laboratories.
Which is remarkable, by the way.
And how much money they were spending to preserve the materials.
Then in another part of his talk, he explains they won't let people have Xerox copies of things, and that when they buy materials from a dealer, they ask the dealer to swear that no copy has ever been made of this, and that they won't buy anything that a copy has been made of.
And he says, why should
We can't justify spending the taxpayers' money for materials that have been copied and that there are copies around.
Well, these two things are in contradiction because not buying something because a copy's been made implies the copy's just as good as the original, that it's a substitute for the original.
If that were the case, why set up these expensive conservation laboratories?
It would be much cheaper to Xerox everything.
So he hasn't thought the position through.
Well, he's defending a position that was established, and there is no basis to defend it.
Nicholas Barker called this policy irresponsible.
And the paper's on, and of course, I said, now, once again, I said, I plan to use that word.
He said, I said it mindfully.
He said, it's irresponsible.
He said, I can think of no other institution in the Western world that has this policy.
Well, you can say that I said it was irresponsible, too.
And I may even have used that word in my article.
I don't know.
But, I mean, I said think that what I said... He said it's indefensible.
What I said in print was just as strong as that.
Because a university is presumably in existence to promote scholarship and... And...
yeah if they have the policy that they can't copy something for you because they want you to come there and also because i mean which naturally any good scholar would do anyway because a good scholar knows that the copy isn't the substance isn't a substitute it's a convenience but you still have to go through it and look at the original and also if they feel that somehow this lessens the value of what they have well then that means they're putting
their own self-image as a university and their financial condition ahead of scholarship.
Well, Robert Graves' son wanted to get some... I just got to see the story.
No, this is the son.
He wanted to get some copies of letters of his father that Texas has.
And he said in return he would give them copies of the letters that he has.
No.
And this is the son who wants to do something
No, I was at Bibliotec Nationale a week ago yesterday.
I'm writing about Carlton Lake.
He's a very interesting character.
I have heard it said that his, despite all the problems with him or whatever, and the criticisms of him, many of which are valid, he has put together an extraordinary collection of 20th century French stuff.
And so, we were there over Easter, and
I went to see Madame Laurence de Rousseau, the chief of service, and she told me how wonderful it is.
It's the best collection she knows all outside of France.
And then as I was leaving, she said, but how long do you know Carlton Lake?
And I said, well, I met him once.
I talked to him a couple of times in the morning.
He called me, by the way.
I'll tell you this often.
He gave me two quotes, which he called me and asked.
And really, at least they put three dollars.
He said, fine.
I said, they're the two best quotes you gave me, but that's fine.
If you don't want them, you have to follow them.
Two quotes are neither going to make or break my book.
But that's my quote.
She said she's working on a major project on Paul Velary.
He has some things.
They have asked Texas to send a letter to County Lake.
I think it had microphones of them.
And she can't understand why she hasn't heard from them yet.
And I...
didn't say anything.
I mean, I'm the observer and I'm the writer, but she's in for a very big surprise.
Yeah, well, I'm afraid.
Almost everybody else in the book world would understand why she hadn't heard.
She hasn't heard, and plus he has great, I mean, I think he's embarrassed.
It's very personal, because I don't think he wants to say no to her, but he has to say no to her.
And then here you have France,
trying to do a major book, one of the great artists, and they are not being allowed access to archival material by the University of Texas.
Something's wrong there.
And I will tell you how this thing plays out, by the way.
I think it's good for you to give some attention to that aspect of what Texas is doing, because it shows how occasionally all this can go wrong, this whole
kind of point I've been making about the cooperation and the uses of the materials for scholarship, and there is an example of a major institution that hasn't cooperated.
And, you know, they're still young, I guess.
I mean, they've only really been doing this since I think this year.
But the thing that they don't recognize is that they've made themselves a laughing stock in the rest
of the book world, so that this kind of thing is always counterproductive.
They think they're doing these things to protect their own image and reputation.
And to increase their stature.
And it's doing exactly the opposite.
Yeah, well, people like Roger Stoddard did, obviously.
People want to talk about Texas.
He has no use for Texas and Carlton Lake because of this thing and how they believe
how they really threw their money around and did what he thinks are deceptive things.
It's an interesting story, and yet the collection is remarkable.
No doubt about that.
Another person I... Do you remember the... I'm just going to turn this over to the side.
I think you're really helping me here.
I told you all this for purposes.
I want your thoughts on it.
It's just a question of proportions in constructing a book.
And you'll be discussing the Scheide Collection and so on.
And then, if there's a chapter on Haven O'Moore, it does seem a little odd, because he's not one of the great figures.
There is an interesting story there, but how does it relate to what you're talking about in general?
And I don't know whether your point about motivation entirely justifies its presence there.
If you were... Of course, as you know, since you're a writer, everything depends on how you define the focus.
You can make anything fit anywhere if you just...
have the right kind of transition to get into it and have the right kind of focus.
Now, a book that had the title or the plan of significant collections and the stories behind them, well, there'd be nothing wrong with having more chapters as one of them, because there's no question that the collection that came up for sale, while it's not important in the sense that it all fits together and serves scholarly purposes,
that was a great sale in the sense it had all those high spots it will always be thought of as a as a significant event in that sense therefore to pick out a number of collections and tell the story behind them well it would fit a book like that the book you're doing is is more interesting and important than that book would it would be
And so I do think, I'm not saying that it shouldn't be there, but I think that you do have to figure out the way you're going to bring it in so that it will seem to be a natural part of it and not undermine what you're doing.
Because there will be people that will be resistant to this, just as Nicholas was, so that you'll have to overcome that.
They will initially be skeptical of that.
I think I have the solution, and I think the solution is...
It will be in there.
But to the degree I just outlined to you, I think this is a wonderful magazine.
I do too.
Like an Atlantic piece, an American piece.
That's right.
And really just let it all work.
Well, I think that is the way to do it.
You ought to use all of this.
This is wonderful.
But it should be a separate piece, which you can then just allude to.
Well, I could use the salient points, which apply to the book.
That's right.
And I could still tell the story of this.
And I would start with the sale, because the sale itself was like from that.
I mean, you could go more sitting up in the glass table, you know.
And I talked to John Marion and Dick Manning, what was going through their minds, and they went up to $2 million, almost $6 million.
And there was Michael Davis in the book.
And they did invite the entire book world to this.
And the book world came, and the book world spent $16 million.
uh so it certainly is of some public interest but i think the story behind this guy and and uh it's i don't know if i do have okay have to give me more i do have to stop but okay but since you had asked about my uh collecting and i commented on the publisher part and i did want to make one point about the other part because
what vaults equally large is books on printing and publishing history.
I mean, what's called bibliography in the large sense of anything that has to do with the production of books.
Well, I have a collection of that, as almost everybody else does as a collector.
This is something that everybody's interested in.
So I know I'm not forming anything
unique there.
Just because it's a good collection doesn't mean that it doesn't duplicate at a lot of other places.
But the one point I want to make is that, naturally, in that, too, I've got some specialties.
One would have to.
And I've tried to collect the works that show the history of the development of scholarly editing, of thinking about critical editing, since that's what I do and write about.
and the development of analytical and descriptive bibliography.
And that in doing that, I've collected those writers, like Fredson Bowers, W. W. Grave, B. Maccaro, as writers.
I mean, I don't see, so often there's a distinction made between the writers that we think of as literary and the writers that we think of as scholars or secondary writers who are doing work on the other writers.
But actually,
Of course, they're all writers, and they all bring out their writings in the same form.
It's all in printed form, so these are equally artifacts.
So if one wants to study the history of the development of this branch of scholarship, then Lake will give the other.